# Tasks manifest

## Build and check manifest

`fractal-task-tools` includes a set of [task models](../reference/fractal_task_tools/task_models.md) to be used in the `task_list.py` module. An example may look like
```python
from fractal_task_tools.task_models import ConverterCompoundTask


AUTHORS = "Name1 Surname1, Name2 Surname2"
DOCS_LINK = "https://example.org"
TASK_LIST = [
    ConverterCompoundTask(
        name="Convert Cellvoyager to OME-Zarr",
        executable_init="tasks/cellvoyager_to_ome_zarr_init.py",
        executable="tasks/cellvoyager_to_ome_zarr_compute.py",
        meta_init={"cpus_per_task": 1, "mem": 4000},
        meta={"cpus_per_task": 1, "mem": 4000},
        category="Conversion",
        modality="HCS",
        tags=["Yokogawa", "Cellvoyager", "2D", "3D"],
        docs_info="file:task_info/convert_cellvoyager_to_ome_zarr.md",
    ),
]
```

Where:

1. More details about the different Fractal task types are available at [the task-types page](./task_types.md).
2. The `AUTHORS` variable is optional. If unset, `fractal-task-tools` looks at the `pyproject.toml` in the current directory (if any) and tries to parse authors' names from it. If also the second approach fails, no authors will be set in the manifest.
3. The `DOCS_LINK` variable is optional

Once the `task_list.py` module is defined, `fractal-task-tools` also includes a command-line interface for creating and checking a manifest file.

The [`create` command](../../reference/fractal-manifest/create/) can be used as in
```console
fractal-manifest create --package my-task-package
```
and it writes the manifest to a file called `__FRACTAL_MANIFEST__.json`, in the root folder where the package `my-task-package` is installed.

The [`check` command](../../reference/fractal-manifest/check/) can be used as in
```console
fractal-manifest check --package my-task-package
```
and it verifies that the on-disk manifest is up-to-date, which is useful e.g. as a continuous-integration step:


## JSON Schemas

Each task listed in the manifest is associated to a JSON Schema that represents its arguments (or two schemas, if the task has both a non-parallel and a parallel unit). These schemas are stored in the `args_schema_non_parallel` and `args_schema_parallel` properties of each task.

This kind of schemas are not used at task runtime (where the validity of task arguments is typically enforced by the [`@pydantic.validate_call` decorator](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/validation_decorator)), but they form the basis for constructing the [`fractal-web`](https://github.com/fractal-analytics-platform/fractal-web) user interface that lets a user edit task arguments.

The `args_schema_version` property, which is set at the manifest level, determines a set of constraints on the task-arguments schemas. What is described below applies to the current one as of `fractal-task-tools=0.5.0`, named `args_schema_version = "fractal_schema_v1"`.

> **NOTE**: This version has relevant breaking changes with respect to the previous version (`args_schema_version = "pydantic_v2"`), which was supported until `fractal-task-tools=0.4.*`.

### Restrictions on JSON Schemas

A set of patterns are forbidden in the Python functions representing Fractal tasks, to simplify the generation of task-arguments user interface in [`fractal-web`](https://github.com/fractal-analytics-platform/fractal-web).

The list of forbidden values is as follows (note: this is currently evolving, and the ground truth is in the [`_specs.py` module](/reference/fractal_task_tools/_specs/#fractal_task_tools._specs.validate_schema)):

- E01: Property names cannot be in one of the [forbidden ones](/reference/fractal_task_tools/_specs/#fractal_task_tools._specs._FORBIDDEN_NAMES).
- E02: The `definitions` keyword is not supported, in favor of `$defs`.
- E03: `enum` with non-homogeneous possible values (e.g. an integer and a string) are not supported.
- E04: Underdefined schemas like the ones generated by the `typing.Any` Python type hint are not supported.
- E05: Boolean properties without a default are not supported.
- E06: Object with boolean values are not supported.
- E07: Empty strings are not supported in default values of string, array, or object properties.
- E10: Nullable `boolean`s are not supported.
- E11: Nullable `enum`s are not supported.
- E12: `anyOf` of [non-`null` primitive types](/reference/fractal_task_tools/_specs/#fractal_task_tools._specs._NON_NULL_PRIMITIVE_TYPES) are not supported.
- E20: `oneOf` for the `items` of an array is not supported unless `discriminator` is present.
- E21: `oneOf` with no `discriminator` is not supported.
- E22: `oneOf` items which are not `$ref`s are not supported.
